.. vi: syntax=rst

===================
System Requirements
===================

Documentation with RST
======================

Purpose
-------

Propose an alternative to MS Office for technical documentation

.. _`s3d`:

Requirements on Documentation
-----------------------------

The project documentation format shall be validated by verifying the following requirements.

.. _`sa7`:

:sa7: |rwj|

The documentation format increase productivity in comparison to MS Office.

.. _`s9o`:

:s9o: |r9h|

The documentation format is not new.

.. _`sq0`:

:sq0: |r9h|

The documentation format is support by a large open source community.

.. _`s9v`:

:s9v: |rbc|

It is possible to diff a documentation file with the version control system (`VCS`_) like `SVN`_ or `GIT`_.

.. _`scf`:

:scf: |rvd|

Tools shall be available for conversion to the following formats

  - `HTML`_: to make the documentation viewable over the internet
  - `PDF`_: to archive a version and for printing
  - `DOCX`_ and `ODT`_: to satisfy existing procedures and habits for printing

The tools shall be

- open-source and community supported
- stable

.. _`san`:

:san: |rvd|, hyperlinks

The documentation items shall be marked by a flat and unordered IDs.

Use these IDs to jump to documentation items inside the editor 
via a keyboard shortcut or a mouse click: hypertext.

Support hyperlinks in the formats the documentation can be converted to.

.. _`stq`:

:stq: |rvd|

Full text search over all files 
with regular expressions shall be available from inside the editor for

- source code and
- documentation

.. _`sed`:

:sed: |r62|

The documentation can be opened by a normal text editor.

The documentation is easy to read and write in a text editor.

.. _`s45`:

:s45: |rpn| 

Support formatting::

    paragraphs, indentation, sections with headers
    enumerated and bullet lists, footnotes, citations, comments
    bold, italic, typeface, hyperlinks
    tables, images, figures, code listings, mathematics

The formatting

- is not obtrusive (|r9g|)
- shall be intuitive 
- does not need much learning

.. _`s86`:

:s86: |rgn|

Table-like data is store as text using a format that is 

- not too verbose
- easily accessible by scripting (|sgt|)

.. _`sgt`:

:sgt: |roc|, |r1p|

Make it easy to automatically generate parts of documentation 

- from source code
- from data

Data shall be usable 

- in source code 
- in documentation

.. _`s0t`:

:s0t: |rbc|

Automatically generate a traceability file that shows how documentation items are linked.
Warn about missing or duplicate targets.

.. _`s8c`:

:s8c: |roc|, |r8d|

Provide means to integrate into the documentation

- defines that are also usable in source code
- calculation results

.. _`slp`:

:slp: 

Requirements on Project
-----------------------

.. _`s10`:

:s10: |rbc|

The project uses a version control system (`VCS`_) like `SVN`_ or `GIT`_.
Documentation history is handled by the `VCS`_.

.. _`sxr`:

:sxr: |rvl|

The project uses a build system.

Creation of documentation is integrated in the build system.

.. _`s1g`:

:s1g: |roc|

Whenever something is used twice in code and documentation
let it be generated from a master copy: constants, defines of structs, ...

.. _`scs`:

:scs: |rvd|

All text concerning development is integrated in the documentation.

- specifications
- design descriptions
- test plans
- issues
- meeting minutes
- ...

.. _`sim`:

:sim: |rvd|

Every developers know where to put information and how and where to find information.

.. _`sil`:

:sil: |rak|

Developers can work independently.

This is linked to |s10|. The `VCS`_ needs to enable independent development.
A distributed `VCS`_ like `GIT`_ has advantages in this regard.

.. _`grep`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep
.. _`DOCX`: http://www.ecma-international.org/publications/standards/Ecma-376.htm
.. _`ODT`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument
.. _`VCS`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_version_control_software
.. _`SVN`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Subversion
.. _`URI`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier
.. _`hypertext`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext
.. _`WYSIWYG`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WYSIWYG
.. _`vendor lock-in`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vendor_lock-in
.. _`light markup`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightweight_markup_language
.. _`Office-XML-SDK`: https://github.com/OfficeDev/Open-XML-SDK
.. _`DOM`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Object_Model
.. _`PDF`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portable_Document_Format
.. _`LaTex`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX
.. _`include`: https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/issues/4160
.. _`constraints`: https://everypageispageone.com/2016/06/05/why-we-need-constrainable-lightweight-markup-languages/
.. _`document markup languages`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_document_markup_languages
.. _`HTML`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML
.. _`GIT`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git
.. _`Ctags`: https://github.com/universal-ctags/ctags/blob/master/parsers/rst.c
.. _`Pandoc`: https://pandoc.org/
.. _`Docutils`: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/
.. _`Sphinx`: http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/
.. _`RST`: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html
.. _`light markup`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightweight_markup_language
.. _`rstdoc`: https://github.com/rpuntaie/rstdoc
.. _`dcx.py`: https://github.com/rpuntaie/rstdoc/blob/master/rstdoc/dcx.py
.. _`rstdcx`: https://github.com/rpuntaie/rstdoc/blob/master/rstdoc/dcx.py
.. _`waf`: https://github.com/waf-project/waf
.. _`tikz`: http://mirror.kumi.systems/ctan/graphics/pgf/base/doc/pgfmanual.pdf
.. _`LaTex`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX
.. _`substitutions`: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#replacement-text


.. include:: _links_sphinx.rst


